---
title: So what is RSS, anyways?
date: 2026-4-17 10:40 PM CDT
updated: 2026-4-18 4:30 PM CDT

summary: Talking about what "Really Simple Syndication", or RSS, actually is, and why I think despite it being left behind by many major sites, it's still a very convenient tool to have.

tags:
  - computers
  - the internet
---

Good question. If you're like me, you probably thought RSS, or "Really Simple Syndication", was an outdated, long-forgotten relic of the early internet. Or maybe you don't know what the hell I'm talking about at all. EVerything I said just now is... half correct, let's say. It's definitely old, and it's definitely been left behind in favour of many different kinds of alternatives. "But Mark," you might ask, "if that's the case, then why did you spend multiple hours ironing out [the perfect feed](/feed) setup for the blog I am reading right now? And why should I care?"

I'm gonna be painfully honest. I can't say that I see a resurgence of RSS feeds in the mainstream anytime soon. But, due to their nature, that doesn't really mean they're useless!

### The actual explanation

So, RSS and other feeds like it (ATOM, for instance,) are a way of providing updates on some sort of subject: a [blog](/rss), a [webcomic](https://xkcd.com/rss.xml), [weather updates](https://api.weather.gov/alerts/active.atom), a [youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/feeds/videos.xml?channel_id=UCy0tKL1T7wFoYcxCe0xjN6Q), a [news site](https://itsfoss.com/rss/), a [social media account](https://bsky.app/profile/did:plc:2p67fsbkpwet3rp5a33wgl5v/rss), an artist's personal gallery, a podcast, [software updates](https://github.com/KDE/krita/releases.atom), heck, pretty much anything that has updates that you want to keep track of. And, the best thing is: you don't need _any account whatsoever_ to do this! The servers themselves simply provide a file that [an](https://github.com/0x2E/fusion) [RSS](https://github.com/martinrotter/rssguard) [reader](https://github.com/nkanaev/yarr) can read, and the RSS reader does the rest. You'll be presented a list for each feed in most cases, or other times one single combined feed in the order they arrived, sometimes with previously-read events hidden.

And that's basically it! It is called "Really Simple", after all. All it requires on the server end is a file that includes the event's name, the time it happened, and almost always some content with it (most readers support at least basic HTML, so each event _could_ resemble a mini webpage if the author wanted it to be, there might also be attached images, videos, sounds, or similar) that gets updated whenever there's a new event. This can honestly be done by hand on small sites, though that might not be particularly fun. There's plenty of generators for it, and I imagine most people aren't going to be building their own blogs from scratch, so the details likely aren't too important. And again, that's _it_. Most of the smarts are on the client-side.

Basically, we've got a system that would allow us to "follow" accounts, sites, anything like that, without having an account ourselves! Now... well, obviously, I think I'm somewhat in the minority of people who just don't mesh with social media, usually being a permanent lurker who rarely posts or even reposts anything. As such, I'll refrain from saying the benefits are obvious, or that it's a perfect solution and the only thing we need ever, but there are benefits to it. Maybe there's artists you want to follow the work of, but they're, say, on a site you don't use for one reason or another, you can just follow an RSS feed of their account if one exists! (Sadly, there is no longer officially-provided twitter RSS feeds, though there once were. I think there's unofficial ones, though.) That way, you can still get updates from them along with anyone or anything else you have the feed of, no account needed whatsoever. And, since the content is usually included as well, you might not even to open the site itself at all! One of my favourite features (that probably would be more appreciated by the average internet-connected person) is that once the feeds get pulled, usually every X hours as well as when you open your RSS reader, all the saved events are available offline! You can have a collection of posts from the past day or so that you can go over without having to use up data on a train ride home or whatever times you don't have easy access to internet.

### Downsides

The drawbacks, since of course, there have to be some, generally seem to be that it's just a paradigm that the internet has left behind. Updates aren't instant, like I said, it's usually a matter of whenever a timer triggers, your RSS reader notices a new entry in the desired feed, and then appends it to your feed, meaning that you might not be notified of things for an hour or more after it actually happens. Secondly, the device itself has to store all this. A lot of HTML doesn't mean much, but if you're getting large images pulled with each entry and you're not cleaning out old entries (again, that functionality depends on your RSS reader), you might build up a fair amount of data not doing much. Third, many sites have hidden their RSS feeds, if not gotten rid of them altogether. This throws a wrench in the works, as without feeds, there's not really anything to follow. Bluesky, I've noticed, has RSS feeds, which is certainly a nice touch. Fediverse software such as Mastodon and [Akkoma](https://akkoma.dev) have them too, though this is more to be expected as RSS seems to maintain popularity in lots of more technically-minded, decentralization-focused circles (for obvious reasons). Finally... I'm gonna be real, most RSS readers I've used have felt like or have quite literally been E-mail clients. They feel a bit clunky and slow to me in the age of microblog social media, where we're used to infinitely scrolling feeds that don't require you to open something to read or see more. The thing is, someone could absolutely make such a thing, and maybe someone has that I just haven't found yet! That's the magic, it's a standard simple enough that implementation can vary VERY wildly.

### Honourable mentions

Shout out to [JSON feeds](https://www.jsonfeed.org/) which use JSON instead of XML to convey something similar to RSS and ATOM feeds. However, it's not as widely supported as the other two who have been around much longer, and... the fact the official JSON feed site's feed doesn't work isn't really a great sign. I provide it nonetheless since it's super easy when my site already is written mostly in typescript, and, well, I'm a bit of a perfectionist.

If you think about it a certain way, ActivityPub, the protocol that makes federation on the fediverse possible, is somewhat of a far more specific, active relative of RSS. Maybe someday we'll get ActivityPub - AT Protocol (what bluesky uses) bridges or whatever, and we'll be able to have a more decentralized system for social media that people actually use, hah.

But, anyways. This post isn't meaning to be a call to action to start using RSS like crazy or anything. I just want to share my personal love for something we've sort of left behind, and how I think it's still useful even today. Remember to like and subscribe and hit the bell and buy my merch and--
